---
title: "War Diaries"
author: "Alan Brooke"
date: 2024-03-20
link: true
---

## Phoney War - Pre Dunkirk

1. The top general reluctant for war. "The awful futility of it all as proved by the last war... I suppose that conflicts between right and wrong are still necessary and that we have still got to be taught more fully the futility of war. Eventually we must come to ways of settling our difficulties without war."

2. On small administrative staffs ref the phoney war (October 1939): "I feel that GHQ have made the mistake of being far too large for the force we have out here at present."

3. Prescience re the difficulties of the allies moving into Belgium: "As the days pass, the probability of a German advance this year lessens but we are far from being out of the woods yet... Our main danger lies in being drawn into Belgium for political reasons instead of holding positions we have been preparing."

4. More prescience re French pre-war: "The ceremony had been a simple one... almost comic at times in its lack of thoroughness. I could not help wondering whether the French are still a firm enough nation to again take their part in seeing this war through. "

5. "We went round one of the Maginot forts... It reminded me of a battleship built on land, a masterpiece in its way. It gave me little feeling of security and I considered the French would have done better to invest the money in the shape of mobile defences, such as more and better aircraft and more heavy armour divisions, than to sink all this money into the ground."

6. More on risk of Belgium: "I feel that we are unlikely ever to defend the front we have spent so much work and thought in preparing. How can we avoid being drawn forward into Belgium? Our main difficulty will be not to be drawn beyond Antwerp. In a more aligned political consideration must not be allowed to override the strategical ones."

7. On importance of focus (~January 1940): "Apparently various expeditions to other theatres of war are being considered... most of which would lead to a dispersal of effort and provide better chances than ever for our losing the war. History is repeating itself in an astonishing way: the same string-pulling as in the last war, the same differences between statesmen and soldiers, the same faults as regards changing key posts at the opening of hostilities, and now the same tendency to start subsidiary theatres of war. To contemplate wild projects! We shall apparently never apply the lessons of one war to the next."

8. More on Maginot: "Millions of money are stuck in the ground for a purely static defence and the total firepower developed by these works bears no relation to the time, work, and money spent in their construction. Their most dangerous aspect is a psychological one: a sense of false security, a feeling of sitting behind an impregnable iron fence. Should the fence by chance be broken and the French fighting spirit be brought down, crumbling with it "

9. More cf (7): "The proposed plans fill me with gloom. They are based on the assumption that the Germans will not attack during the spring. Personally I hold diametrically opposed views. Any forward move of the Germans on this front must necessarily bring operations and subsidiary theatres to a standstill but unfortunately by then we shall have seriously reduced our strength on this front and will be less able to meet any attack. "

10. More prescience: "He expressed the view that he thought it was very doubtful whether the Germans would attack on the Western Front this year. I told him I had no doubt about this matter whatsoever and looked upon it as a certainty. Then I had a talk with Lord Milne... he too considered we were wrong to advance at Belgium. "

11. "It is a very strange war but I sometimes wonder whether, if it lasts much longer in its present state, we may not on both sides realise that there are better ways of settling our differences than by resorting to war. This will require a change of mentality."

12. Focus: "After work I attended a GHQ conference. We spent a bare half hour discussing the important plans for an advance into Belgium and followed it up with two hours of complete details on training matters of minor importance!! It is maddening not to be able to deal properly with the higher direction of this war without being drawn into minor details."

13. 10th May 1940 war begins in earnest and the "D" plan he dreads comes into effect.

14. "I was not much impressed by him at that interview and my estimate of his value was not far out. Apparently his DLM had lost all its tanks and now consisted of a column of buses and workshops with a certain number of men with rifles. The whole outfit was more of an encumbrance than anything else. Its fighting value was practically nil whilst its power of blocking roads with its huge vehicles was unlimited."

15. Chatting to Anthony Eden post Dunkirk before setting up BEF and propping up French. "He was very charming and sympathetic as to all the difficulties that lay ahead of me and finished by asking whether I was satisfied with what was being done. I astonished him by replying that I was far from satisfied that the mission I was being sent on, from a military point of view, had no value and no possibility of accomplishing anything. Furthermore that we had only just escaped a major disaster at Dunkirk and were now risking a second such disaster."

## Post-Dunkirk - Commander home forces
16. "Modern developments, such as wireless and telephones, may constitute serious dangers for a commander within the field. If these systems are made use of by politicians to endeavour to influence operations without being conversant and familiar with the circumstances prevailing in their theatre of operations, Wellington was indeed fortunate."

17. On trying to stop collapse of France (purely polotical motives): "To try and relate political considerations... with military necessities, which stare one in the face, is a very difficult matter when these two considerations pull in diametrically opposed directions. Politically it may have been desirable to support our allies to the very last moment... militarily it was self evident from the start that the very small forces at our disposal could do nothing towards restoring the military situation."

18. Having taken over Southern Command: "Attended a conference on the Local Defence Volunteers... Why do we in this country turn to all the old men when we require a new volunteer force? Old men spell delay and chaos! I wonder whether I've reached the age to stand clear and let younger men replace me."

19. People selection: "Plymouth's sub-area commander, does not seem what is wanted and his plans of defence are very sketchy. Green must, I am afraid, go. He has not got the required qualities."

20. On presenting a mask of stability: "The idea of failure was appalling enough to render the load of responsibility almost unbearable. Perhaps the hardest part of it all was the absolute necessity to submerge all of one's innermost feelings in apprehension and maintain a confident exterior. To find yourself daily surrounded by your comrades, who may at any moment find themselves entirely dependent for their security on your ability to defend them... and with it all to maintain a calm and confident exterior, is a test of one's character. The bitterness of which must be experienced to be believed!"

21. Meeting Churchill: "He is most interesting to listen to and full of the most marvellous courage, considering the burden he is bearing. He is full of offensive thoughts for the future but I think he fully realises the difficulties he is up against. He said he wondered if England had been in such dire straits since the armada days. He refers to Hitler always as 'that man'."

22. Meeting de Gaulle: "Whatever good qualities he may have were marred by his overbearing manner, his megalomania, and his lack of co-operative spirit... In all discussions he assumed that the problem of the liberation of France was mine! whilst he was concentrating on how he would govern it as its dictator as soon as it was liberated. Added to these disadvantages, his headquarters were so completely lacking in security that it became quite impossible to discuss any future plans with them."

23. On  imminent threat of invasion in September 1940 and the loneliness of the leader/founder/one in charge: "The responsibility of feeling what any mistakes or even misappreciations may mean in the future of these isles and of the Empire is a colossal one and one which staggers me at times! I wish I had more adequately trained formations... I do not think I can remember any time in the whole of my career when my responsibilities weighed heavier on me than they did during those days of the impending invasion. The full knowledge of all that depended on my preparations for, and conduct of, the battle to repel the invasion, combined with the unpleasant realisation as to the deficiencies in equipment and training in the forces at my disposal, made the prospect of the impending conflict a burden that was almost unbearable. Added to it all was this necessity to maintain outward confident appearance. There was not a soul to whom one could disclose one's inward anxieties without risking the calamitous effects of lack of confidence, demoralisation, doubt, and all those insidious workings which undermine the power of resistance."

24. On Churchill: "He has a wonderful vitality and bears his heavy burden remarkably well. It would be almost impossible to find a man to fill his place at present."

25. More musing on war: "Another day gone and thank God for it. Every day that passes must at least be one last day of this war but there are times when the madness and the folly of war choke one... Yet through all its destruction, uselessness, and havoc I can see some progress. Progress that can never be achieved without the upheaval of war. Long-standing institutions and social distinctions are shattered by war and make room for more modern methods of life. Those that would never release what they hold in peace are forced to do so in war to the benefit of a multitude. Ultimately I suppose that human beings, from much suffering, have become wiser and will appreciate that greater happiness can be found in this world by preferring their neighbours to themselves. "

26. End of 1940, Battle of Britain done, threat of invasion receding slightly: "Dunkirk will take its place among many examples of disasters due to political misappreciations of the requirements of war. It should also rank as one of the finest recoveries from disaster. I feel, however, that the air battle for England and the German defeat in its attempt at invasion will probably loom as one of the greatest successes of British arms, which will forever remain famous in terms of the PM's incomparable sentence: 'Seldom in the field of human conflict have so many earned so much to so few.'"

27. Winston not prioritising well, politics over needs "I was able to stress the importance of spare parts for tanks and spare tanks but Winston always disliked the idea of the provision of spares. Everything into the front window. Beaverbrook was even worse in his desire to establish high figures for production. This failure to provide adequate spare parts for tanks, which accounted for many of our failures and early difficulties in armoured fighting in North Africa."

28. Winston again: "PM in great form and on the whole a very successful meeting but it's surprising how he maintains a light-hearted exterior in spite of the vast burden he is bearing. He is quite the most wonderful man I have ever met and is a source of never-ending interest studying and getting to realise that occasionally such human beings make their appearance on this earth. Human beings who stand out head and shoulders above all others."

29. On Beaverbrook putting personal vendetas/prestige ahead of public service: "The more I see of politicians the less I think of them. They are seldom influenced directly by the true aspects of a problem and usually guided by some ulterior political reason. They are always terrified of public opinion as long as the enemy is sufficiently far but when closely threatened by the enemy they are inclined to lose their heads and then blame all their previous errors on the heads of the military whose advice they have failed to follow. The more I see of democracy the more I doubt our wisdom of attaching such importance to it! I cannot see how our present system of democracy can produce real qualified leaders of a nation."

## Nov 1940 - Appointment to CIGS
30. "Today the papers publish Dill's departure and my appointment as CIGS. I suppose I ought to be very grateful and happy at reaching the top of the ladder. I can't say that I do. I feel a heavy depression at Dill going after the close contacts I have had with him ever since the war started. I had never hoped or aspired to reach these dizzy heights and now that I'm stepping up onto the plateau land of my military career, the landscape looks cold, black and lonely, with a ghastly responsibility hanging as a black thunder cloud over me. Perhaps I am feeling liverish for want of exercise."

31. "I remember well being appalled in those early days of my time as CIGS to find the lack of a definite policy for the prosecution of the war. We worked from day to day, in a hand-to-mouth existence with a policy based on opportunism. Every wind that blew swung us like a weathercock. As I was to find out, planned strategy was not Winston's strong card. He preferred to work by intuition and impulse."

32. Notes from a War Cabinet meeting: "During most of the debate the conduct of the war seemed to have been pushed into the background. Self-interests seemed to predominate."

33. Stories from Eden's trip to Moscow (Dec 1941): "The dinner started at 10 p.m. and lasted till 5 a.m. Timoshenko arrived drunk and by continuous drinking restored himself to sobriety by 5 a.m. On the other hand Voroshilov, after at least arriving sober, had to be carried out before the evening was through... As Voroshilov slumped under the table, Stalin turned to Antony and said, 'Do your generals also hold their drink so badly?' Antony, the complete diplomat, replied, 'They may have a better capacity for drink but they have not the same ability for winning battles!'"

34. Feb 1942, fall of Singapore: "I have during the last ten years had an unpleasant feeling that the British Empire was decaying, that we were on a slippery decline. I wonder if I was right. I certainly never expected that we should fall to pieces as fast as we are and see Hong Kong and Singapore go in less than three months. Plus failure in the Western Desert is far from reassuring. We have had a wonderful power of recuperation in the past. I wonder whether we shall again bring off a comeback... News of Singapore getting worse and that of Burma beginning to deteriorate. Added to that the Gneisenau, Scharnhorst, and Prinz Eugèn succeeded in running the gauntlet of the Channel yesterday without being destroyed whilst we lost some forty aircraft to the twenty enemy planes brought down. These are black days... We are paying very heavily now for failing to face the insurance premiums essential for the security of an empire. This has usually been the main cause for the loss of empires in the past... PM was on the whole in a good mood. This was typical of Winston, in a real crisis he was always at his best and stood all the heavy shocks without flinching."

35. On boards re the Chiefs of Staff: "The introduction of an outside chairman will never smooth over differences between members of the COS if these exist. Should there be such differences, there is only one course: to change some or all of the members of the COS. It is essential that these three men should work together as a perfect trinity."

36. Re Moscow supply and not getting value - politics again overriding sound strategy: "Beaverbrook's policy was to pour everything into their lap without even asking whether it was needed and without ever asking anything in return. As a result we kept on supplying tanks and aeroplanes that could ill be spared and in doing so suffered the heaviest of losses in shipping conveying this equipment to Arctic Russia. We received nothing in return except abuse for handling the convoys inefficiently!"

37. Interesting passage re COS and strategy - a view that war could be won from the air by bombing Germany, wasn't true then, isn't true now (cf. Iran): "Many of them held the opinion that, given sufficient heavy bombers, Germany could be brought to her knees by air action alone. In these circumstances it is not surprising the Air Ministry was anxious to develop its strength in those types of aircraft that were best suited for the attack on Germany. As a result the army was being starved of any types suitable for the direct support of land forces... All air force eyes were trained on Germany and consequently all the personnel were trained for long-distance raids and little interest was displayed in close cooperation with land forces. Many doubted that land forces would ever again be employed in large land operations on the continent. Why therefore provide for a contingency that would probably never arise? They could always produce the argument that the Air Force was at that time busy hitting the Germans hard and that it would be reducing this effort for the problematical benefits to be derived by producing men and machines capable of cooperating with the army in operations that were unlikely ever to take place. It was uphill work striving to obtain what I knew would be essential in the later stages of the war if we were ever to win."

38. "The last day of the first quarter of 1942. Fateful year in which we have already lost a large proportion of the British Empire and are on the high road to lose a great deal more of it. During the last fortnight I have had for the first time since the war started a growing conviction that we are going to lose this war unless we control it very differently and fight it with more determination. But to begin with a democracy is at a great disadvantage against a dictatorship when it comes to war. Secondly, a government with only one big man in it and that one man a grave danger in many respects is in a powerless way. Party politics and party interests still override larger war issues. Petty jealousies colour discussions and influence destinies. Politicians still suffer from that little knowledge of military matters which gives them unwarranted confidence that they are born strategists. As a result they confuse issues, affect decisions, and convert simple problems and plans into confused tangles and hopeless muddles. It is all helplessly depressing."

39. Seeing the wranglers (April 1942): "Took lunch in car and went to see the organisation for breaking down ciphers at Bletchley. A wonderful set of professors and genii. I marvel at the work they succeed in doing."

40. Meeting Marshall: "I found Marshall's rigid form of strategy very difficult to cope with. He never fully appreciated what operations in France would mean: the different standard of training of German divisions as opposed to the raw American divisions and to most of our new divisions. He could not appreciate the fact that the Germans could reinforce the point of attack some three to four times faster than we could. Nor would he understand that until the Mediterranean was open again we should always suffer from the crippling shortage of sea transport."

41. Cabinet disorder "We met the PM and I put the memorandum to him. He was delighted with it and passed it at once... Then PM got me to put up our memorandum to the cabinet. From the start things went wrong. Eden and Cripps thought there was a flaw in it. They began to argue about things they did not understand. Others joined in and very soon we had one of those situations I have now seen frequently in the cabinet, where the real issue is completely lost in arguing about some detail which is misquoted and distorted in the discussion."

42. "Winston's suggestion that I should take over the Eighth Army personally gave rise to the most desperate longings. I had last tasted the thrill of commanding a formation in war whilst commanding II corps in France. For sheer thrill and excitement it stood in a category by itself and not to be compared to a staff appointment. Even that of CIGS, when working for men like Winston, must mean constant frustration, friction, and untold difficulties in achieving the results one was after."

43. Smuts and Stalin: "It has been very interesting to meet men such as Smuts and Stalin. Such a contrast! Smuts I look upon as one of the biggest of nature's gentlemen I have ever seen. A wonderful clear grasp of all things, coupled with the most exceptional charm. Interested in all matters and gifted with marvellous judgement. Stalin, on the other hand, a crafty, brilliant, realistic mind, devoid of any sense of human pity or kindness. Gives one almost an uncanny feeling to be in his presence. He is undoubtedly a big and shrewd brain with clear-cut views as to what he wants and expects to get."

44. "Sir Samuel Hoare on Spain and probable reactions to our re-entry into North Africa. He painted a gloomy picture. It is very hard to maintain one's determination to carry out an operation when everybody keeps pouring into one's ear all the awful dangers one is likely to meet. It takes far more moral courage than anyone would believe to stick to one's plan and refuse to be diverted."

45. Sikorski: "He was charming as usual and very interesting about probable future intentions of Germans. According to him they will be satisfied with the capture of Stalingrad and Grozny for 1942 and will not go on to Baku. They are organising a large labour army to develop the Ukraine and are of every intention of rendering themselves self-supporting as regards grain and oil. They will withdraw large air forces for air attacks in this country during winter nights."

46. Combatting Winston's whims (Norway campaign): "He believed that instead of supporting him, all we did was provide and plan difficulties etc. frequently in this oration he worked himself up into such a state from the woeful picture he had painted that tears streamed down his face. It was very difficult on those occasions not to be filled with sympathy for him when one realised the colossal burden he was bearing, the weight of responsibility he shouldered. On the other hand if we had not checked some of his wild ideas, heaven knows where we should be now."

47. "It is absolutely fatal to tell any politician any secret, they are incapable of keeping it to themselves."

48. On interference from Eden (non military) and need to project confidence in Monty and the wider plan: "I was far from being at peace. I had my own doubts, my own anxieties as the course of events unfolded, but these had to be kept entirely to myself... I had, during that morning's discussion, tried to maintain an exterior of complete confidence. It had worked. Confidence had been restored. I had told them what I thought Monty must be doing and I knew Monty well but there was still just the possibility that I was wrong and that Monty was beat. The loneliness of those moments of anxiety when there is no one one can turn to has to be lived through to realise their intense bitterness. "

49. After reports of early success in North Africa "I think this is the only occasion on which he expressed publicly any appreciation or thanks for work I had done during the whole of the period I worked for him."

50. December 1942 on talk of a truce between Moscow and Berlin, Alan Brooke doesn't buy it: "Stalin is just beginning to get the better of the Bosch and would only accept a settlement entailing restoration of old frontiers plus Baltic states plus a share of the Balkans plus many guarantees for the future, which Germany cannot give. On the German side Germany cannot carry on without grain from Ukraine and oil from the Caucasus plus oil from Romania. I therefore feel that the danger of a peace between Russia and Germany is mostly useful propaganda from either side to secure their own ends."

51. On Patton: "My meeting with Patton had been of great interest. I had already heard of him but must confess that his swash-buckling personality exceeded my expectation. I did not form any high opinion of him nor had I any reason to alter this view at a later date: a dashing, courageous, wild and unbalanced leader, good for operations requiring thrust and push but at a loss in any operation requiring skill and judgement. "

52. On discussion of Sardinia vs Sicily for breaking into Med (January 1943): "When an operation has finally been completed, it all looks so easy but so few people ever realise the infinite difficulties of maintaining an object or a plan and refusing to be driven off it by other people for a thousand good reasons. A good plan pressed through is better than many ideal ones which are continually changing. Advice without responsibility is easy to give."

53. On convincing the Americans to defeat Germany first and hold Japan (May 1943): "It is not sufficient to see something clearly. You have got to try and convince countless people as to where the truth lies when they don't want to be equated with that fact." 

54. Combined COS meetings got unwieldy so back-channel meetings were convened: "I think that this must have been the first of our off-the-record meetings, a procedure we had to adopt on several occasions when we had arrived at loggerheads. It always helped clear the air. The trouble was often due to the fact that the number of attendees during our conferences had grown far too large. The Americans had gone on adding more and more staff officers and we had followed suit. This had resulted in some 20-30 odd people coming in besides the Chiefs of Staff. We sat facing each other and behind us on each side, seated on chairs, was a row of some 15 staff officers. I felt that frequently Marshall did not like shifting from some policy he had been briefed on by his staff lest they should think he was lacking determination."

55. On Monty nausing up Eisenhower without realising: "He was, as usual, most grateful for having his failings pointed out to him. This gratitude was genuine and not assumed of that I am certain. I am also convinced that with his inability to assess other people's feelings through excessive concentration on his own, he was genuinely under the impression that his insistence on obtaining his aircraft was looked on as a joke by Ike!"

56. Tiredness (Sep 1943): "This date brought to an end the first real spell of leave that I had since taking on the job of CIGS. I returned to work with a very flat feeling and a desperate disinclination to work. I feel that nothing less than six months' leave could really restore the necessary drive and vitality to pick up this burden again."

57. "Smuts appeared, having arrived in the morning. He raised the interesting point as to whether we really wanted to dismember Germany now or whether a strong Germany in the future might not assist in balancing power in Europe against Russia."

58. Tiredness, imposter syndrome (Oct 1943): "One of those days when even sunshine fails to dispel the gloom that lies on one. All life and all its enterprises look black. In every problem the moor hills became mountains and failure seemed to be the inevitable result of all enterprise. A desperate feeling of failure, incompetency, and incapacity to carry this burden any longer."

59. "When I look at the Mediterranean I realise only too well how far I've failed in my tasks during the last two years. If only I had had sufficient force of character to swing those American Chiefs of Staff and make them see daylight, how different the war might be. We should have been in a position to force the Dardanelles by the capture of Crete and Rhodes. We should have the whole Balkans ablaze by now and the war might have been finished in 1943! Instead to satisfy American short-sightedness we have been led into agreeing a withdrawal of forces from the Mediterranean for a nebulous second front and have emasculated our offensive strategy. It is heart-breaking."

60. Conference in Alexandria, meeting Chiang Kai-Shek: "The whole conference had been thrown out of gear by Chiang Kai-Shek arriving here too soon. We should never have started our conference with Chiang. By doing so we were putting the cart before the horse. He had nothing to contribute towards the defeat of the Germans and for the matter of that uncommonly little towards the defeat of the Japanese. Why the Americans attached such importance to Chiang I have never discovered. All he did was lead them down a garden path to a Communist China. We should have started this conference by thrashing out thoroughly with the Americans the policy and strategy for the defeat of Germany. We could then have shown a united front to Stalin and finally, if time permitted, seen Chiang and Madame."

61. Teheran conference (Nov 1943): "During this meeting and all the subsequent ones which we had with Stalin, I rapidly grew to appreciate the fact that he had a military brain of the very highest calibre. Never once in any of his statements did he make any strategic error nor did he ever fail to appreciate all the implications of a situation with a quick and unerring eye."

62. On the flawed plan to open a front in Southern France "I felt certain that Stalin stole through these strategic misconceptions but to him they mattered little. His political and military requirements could now be best met by the greatest squandering of British and American lives in the French theatre."

## 1944 Beginning of the end of the war

63. "Heard on the wireless that I had been promoted to Field Marshall. Gave me a curious peaceful feeling that I had, at last and unexpectedly, succeeded in reaching the top rung of the ladder. I certainly never set out to reach this position nor did I ever hope to do so even in my wildest moments. When I look back over my life, no-one could be more surprised than I am to find where I have got to."

64. Foreign Office incompetence: "After lunch I had an interview with Brocas Burrows, who is off to Moscow, and found that the Foreign Office had been briefing him on such a completely conciliatory basis that he did not imagine that he was going to get anything back out of the Russians. Typical of the Foreign Office, the more I see of them the more appalled I am at their inefficiency. "

65. "Just longing for a rest of a few hours from continual war responsibility. The hardest part of bearing such responsibility is pretending that you are absolutely confident of success when you are really torn to shreds with doubts and misgivings. When once decisions are taken, the time for doubts is gone and what is required is to breathe the confidence of success into all those around. This is made doubly hard when subjected to the ravings of prima donnas and the shape of politicians who seem to be incapable of having real faith in their own decisions."

66. On Russia post-war (Jul 1944): "Should Germany be dismembered or gradually converted to an ally to meet the Russian threat of twenty years hence? I suggest that the latter and feel certain that we must from now on regard Germany in a very different light. Germany is no longer the dominating power of Europe: Russia is. Unfortunately Russia is not entirely European. She has, however, vast resources that cannot fail to become the main threat in fifteen years from now."

67. "The more I see of Herbert Morrison the more I despise him. If England is to be ruled by that type of man then we are sunk for a certainty."

68. Tiredness, exhaustion, frustration: "There are moments when I would give anything just to get in a car and drive home, saying I was fed up with the whole show and they could look for someone else to fill my job. The making of plans is just child's play as compared to putting them into execution. I feel worn out and very glad that the thought of going to Italy for a change and rest."

69. On Churchill misunderstanding strategy: "He knows no details, has only got half the picture in his mind, talks absurdities and makes my blood boil to listen to his nonsense. I find it hard to remain civil and the wonderful thing is that three-quarters of the population of the world imagine that Winston Churchill is one of the strategists of history, a second Marlborough, and the other quarter have no conception what a public menace he is and has been throughout this war. It is far better that the world should never know and never suspect the feet of clay of that otherwise superhuman being. Without him England was lost for a certainty. With him England has been on the verge of disaster time and time again."

70. "In my mind Bolshevism, Nazism, Fascism all have their purpose. They all turn the wheel of destiny one or two more cogs forward. Humanity surges forward like the tide, with successive waves of one or other 'ism' romping up to the beach only to be sucked back almost where they started from. In that 'almost' lies the progress forward. It seems essential for humanity to subject itself to untold ordeals in order to achieve even slow progress towards perfection."

71. "One other incident that day left a mark in my mind was Winston at lunch. He arrived completely frozen and almost rolled up on himself like a hedgehog. He was placed in a chair with a hot water bottle at his feet and one in the back of his chair. At the same time good brandy was poured down his throat to warm him internally. The results were wonderful. He thought out rapidly and when the time came produced one of those indescribably funny French speeches which brought the house down."

## 1945

72. "My God, how difficult war is to run, owing to the personalities one has to handle... to handle them you must be young and full of vigour and enthusiasm. Whereas every day I feel older, more tired, less inclined to face difficulties, less capable of facing problems... How difficult it is to carry out, how worthy of trial, but how dangerous a failure in view of its implications."

73. 27 July, Winston out: "The thought that my days of work with Winston had come to an end was a shattering one. There had been very difficult times and times when I felt I could not stand a single more day with him. But running through all our difficulties a bond of steel had been formed uniting us together. We had been so closely linked together in this vast struggle that it would have been impossible for us to go on striving together unless a deep bond of friendship had existed. Had this not been the case there would have been only one alternative: that of parting. No doubt Winston must frequently have felt that he could not stand me any longer and I myself now, as a result of some of our differences, did not replace him. When reading these diaries I have repeatedly felt ashamed of the abuse I had poured on him especially during the latter years. It must however be remembered that my diary was the safety valve and only outlet for all my pent-up feelings: feelings that have been engendered through friction generated from prolonged contacts of very tired individuals."










