---
title: "Bismarck Chronology"
author: "Dominic Cummings"
date: 2024-10-13
link: false
---

1. At university the republican and liberal students repelled him with their bad manners and refusal to duel: ‘their want of breeding in externals and of acquaintance with the forms and manners of good society’, and ‘the extravagance of their political views, based upon a lack of either culture or knowledge of the conditions of life which historical causes had brought into existence... Their ideas gave me the impression of an association between Utopian theories and defective breeding... I returned to Berlin with less liberal opinions than when I quitted it.’

2. Interesting stuff on reluctance to modernise: "During the 1830s the Prussian government had refused to subsidise railways and was reluctant to authorise private railway building. There were many arguments. Railways were seen as a threat to the old order. Joint stock companies would draw capital away from trade and agriculture and depress the price of government bonds. Landowners would lose property. Bureaucrats would lose control. The postal service would lose its monopoly. More government debt would mean more taxes and constitutional concessions."

3. Palmerston to Commons: ‘There is in nature no power but mind, all else is passive and inert; in human affairs this power is opinion; in political affairs it is public opinion; and he who can grasp this power, with it will subdue the fleshly arm of physical strength, and compel it to work out his purpose... those statesman who know how to avail themselves of the passions, and the interests, and the opinions of mankind, are able to give an ascendancy, and to exercise a sway over human affairs, far out of all proportion greater than belong to the power and resources of the state over which they preside’.

4. "Official decisions do not gain in honesty and moderation by being arrived at collectively; for apart from the fact that, in the case of voting by majority, arithmetic and chance take the place of logical reasoning, that feeling of personal responsibility, in which lies the essential guarantee for the conscientiousness of the decision, is lost directly it comes about by means of anonymous majorities."

5. "Lassalle made clear he was happy to help Bismarck alter the franchise and argued that the masses would support the monarchy if it abandoned the liberal middle classes for the proletariat. 'The working class is instinctively inclined towards dictatorship' but must be convinced 'power will be exercised in its own interest'. The proletariat would accept a 'social dictatorship' by the Crown if the Crown would 'strike out in a truly revolutionary and national direction and transform itself from a monarchy of the privileged classes into a social and revolutionary people's monarchy'."

6. "JS: winning the battle with Wilhelm not to go to Frankfurt was '*the most important achievement of his entire career*', if he had failed then as he said to the Dowager Queen Elizabeth he could not have remained as minister, and this was an example of 'Germany's fate' decided by Bismarck and if he had failed then 'the history of Germany and the world would have run a different course'.

(\*While 'most important achievement of his entire career' is an exaggeration, it's fair to argue that this event could have propelled the world down a very different track. If he had lost this argument and resigned, Bismarck would now be dismissed as an out-of-his-depth loser in history's footnotes and Prussia/Germany would undoubtedly have evolved very differently. Even if some sort of expanded Prussia had happened (who knows) it would not have had the distinctive constitution that he crafted. If he had resigned perhaps Wilhelm would have ended up abdicating after all and Frederick would have ruled for 20 years before dying of cancer in the 1880s. Given how hard it was for Bismarck to push Wilhelm to challenge Austria it must be doubted whether anyone else could have done so.)"

7. On the Schleswig-Holstein affair: "The Schleswig-Holstein question was a nut on which we might well have broken our teeth. Denmark didn't worry me. I counted on her making blunders and it was only a question of creating a favorable situation. Austria had to be brought to see that she would dissipate all sympathy in Germany if she didn't go with us. Russia had to be reminded of the services we rendered when Austria wanted to mobilize Germany against her. England had to be isolated so that she would confine herself to threats, as she always does when no-one will pull her chestnuts out of the fire for her. The individual actions were trifles in themselves; to see that they connected was the difficulty."

8. From a letter to Goltz ~Schleswig-Holstein crisis: "If we were now to turn our back on the Great Powers in order to throw ourselves into the arms of the small states caught in the net of democratic clubbery, it would be the most wretched state into which one could deliver the monarchy at home and abroad. We would be pushed instead of pushing; we would lean for support on elements which we do not control, which are necessarily hostile to us, but to which we would have to submit for better or worse."

9. During Schleswig-Holstein crisis: "He wrote to his cousin asking him for his help with buying a property for General Wrangel at a decent price, a job thrown at him by the King (Steinberg p.219; JS right to remind readers that amid the 'great events' people like Bismarck are having to deal with endless small tasks forgotten in the history books, many of which can explode into big problems if not handled right)."
